---
title: "Fundamentals of Physics 2"
collection: teaching
type: "Undergraduate course"
permalink: /teaching/physics2
venue: "Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (UFSC)"
date: 2022-01-01
taughtat: "2022-2"
location: "Florianopolis, SC, Brazil"
---

This course covers the fundamentals of rotational mechanics, oscillations, waves (including sound), and the principles of thermodynamics. We study the kinematics and dynamics of rigid body rotation, and grasp fundamental concepts related to temperature, heat, entropy, thermodynamic cycles and the kinetic theory of gases.

Objectives
======

* Master the principles of rotational mechanics, gaining proficiency in analyzing the kinematics and dynamics of rigid body rotation.
* Develop a comprehensive understanding of mechanical oscillations and waves, with a specific focus on the properties of sound.
* Acquire fundamental knowledge of temperature, heat, entropy, and thermodynamic cycles within the context of thermodynamics.
* Explore the kinetic theory of gases and its application in explaining macroscopic properties, connecting microscopic behavior to macroscopic observations.
* Apply acquired concepts to real-world problem-solving scenarios, fostering the ability to integrate and utilize knowledge in practical applications.

Bibliography
======

1. HALLIDAY, David; RESNICK, Robert; WALKER, Jearl. _Fundamentos de física_. 10. ed. Rio de Janeiro: LTC, 2016.
2. TIPLER, Paul Allen; MOSCA, Gene. _Física: para cientistas e engenheiros_. 6. ed. Rio de Janeiro: LTC, c2009
3. YOUNG, Hugh D.; FREEDMAN, Roger A.; FORD, A. Lewis (colab.). _Física_. Volumes 1 e 2, 14. ed. São Paulo: Pearson, 2016.
